[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA GARR: Do you feel that
you look older than your age,
and you can't understand
the stubborn weight
gain that you can't lose?
Are you beyond exhausted,
and no matter how much sleep
you get, it's just not enough?
Is your libido running
your relationship?
Maybe it's ruining
your relationship.
Women everywhere are fed
up and for a good reason,
people pleasing,
endless worry, striving
to prove that you're valuable,
insecurity, overwhelm,
and crashing into burnout.
Even if this isn't
you, it may be someone
that you know and love.
Joining me is functional
medicine specialist,
Dr. Keesha Ewers.
And she says, no more.
We deserve so much better.
Dr. Keesha is a board-certified
functional medicine specialist
and an Ayurvedic
medicine specialist,
as well as being a doctor
of sexology, psychotherapy,
energy worker, yoga
teacher, and passionate
about getting to the root
problem of any disease
or imbalance through her
Academy of Integrative Medicine.
Thank you for joining me.
>>KEESHA EWERS: It's so
wonderful to be here.
Thank you.
>>LISA: So what is a
doctor of sexology?
>>EWERS: Well, I
always tell people,
it's the best doctor ever.
And the reason I say
that is because I
am able to really delve
into human relationships.
People often think of sexology
as just sexual function
in the bedroom.
And that's not
actually accurate.
I used to have all these people
coming and asking for hormone
replacement therapy.
And I would start
asking questions
like, why do you think you need
hormone replacement therapy?
And they would say, well,
you gave it to my sister,
my aunt, my daughter, my friend.
And they feel fantastic.
And I want some of that.
And so then I would
start saying, OK, so
what's happening for you?
Well, my libido went to
Tahiti and left me behind--
that kind of thing.
And so then I would start
asking questions like,
so when's the last time
you had a libido level
that you were happy with?
And I would get people
crying in my office--
actually, men and women.
This tends to be a gender bias--
of only women feel this way.
But it's not accurate.
Science shows us
that over 30% of men
report low sexual desire at
some point in their lives.
And that's just reported.
Because we know men
don't report things.
>>LISA: Well, it's interesting,
because most of the ads on TV
are about sexual
enhancement for men.
>>EWERS: Exactly.
And that's sexual function.
Sexual desire is something
totally different.
So we tend to mishmash
all of this together.
So then I would say, like,
well, do you like your partner?
And again, more tears.
And I would say, well,
estrogen, and progesterone,
and testosterone aren't
going to help this.
So let's really delve to
the root of this problem.
And I went back to school
and got a PhD in this.
Because there was nowhere in
the medical literature that
showed what I was seeing in my
office that, when someone is
hurt emotionally inside, when
they feel rejected, or not
good enough, or not pretty
enough, or the wrong weight,
or whatever it is that
women have going on--
>>LISA: All these issues.
>>EWERS: --or men-- that
their sexual desire goes down.
And hormones don't
bring that back up.
There are actually two
kinds of low libido.
One is inherent, meaning there
has never been sexual desire
ever for self or another.
And then there's acquired.
And that's the one of
the menopausal woman
who had a wonderful sex life
with a partner and herself.
And then hormones tanked.
And all of the sudden,
she has no sexual desire.
And she says things like,
when I have sexual intercourse
with this partner
that I love, it
feels like I have cut
glass in my vagina.
That one needs bioidentical
hormone replacement.
All the others don't.
And they're half and half.
>>LISA: Interesting.
So the inherited one--
>>EWERS: Inherent.
>>LISA: Inherent, OK.
So the inherent means that--
>>EWERS: Oftentimes,
there's been some trauma.
>>LISA: Trauma, OK.
And that's what we're
talking about today.
>>EWERS: Or there's a mental
health issue like OCD, anxiety,
depression, some
neurotransmitter disorder,
or genetic disorder
that has clicked
on when hormones came in
around 12 to 14 years of age.
And so then that
normal sexual desire
that comes on at that
age never clicked on.
>>LISA: So is there a link
between this unresolved sexual
trauma-- any kind of trauma--
and autoimmune disease?
>>EWERS: There's a big link.
And that's such
a great question.
And I actually sat down and
wrote a book about this.
Because there's so much
science to show this.
Any kind of trauma in your
background-- and little spoiler
alert, everybody's had some.
And we'll talk about that.
But any kind of trauma
in your background
actually sets up
your nervous system
to go into fight or flight.
And so when you're in
that fight or flight,
like there's a lion chasing
a zebra on the Savanna
and the zebra thinks the
lion's about to eat it,
that actually signals the body.
And the body is just very
wisely wired to know,
it's not safe to
reproduce right now.
It's not safe to stop and go
to the bathroom right now.
Memory changes to-- just look
at the horizon for safety.
And so everything shifts
to get you out of danger.
We're wired to be able to do
that for short periods of time,
not long periods of time.
When we get so that our little
gas pedal is stuck on go
and we're always
in that state, we
release a stress hormone from
our little adrenal glands
that sit on top of the kidneys
that respond to the brain's
signal that we're in danger.
And it releases cortisol
out into the body,
which breaks down the gut
wall, which then creates
an immune system malfunction.
And we become very
hypervigilant against things
in our environment.
So in essence, the
hypervigilance of the mind
is creating hypervigilance
in the body,
which puts us at a very
high risk for autoimmunity.
That's definitely
what happened to me.
And it's a pandemic in
our society right now.
>>LISA: Tell me
about your story.
How did this happen to you?
>>EWERS: Yeah, so my
story is not unusual.
People will hear it, and
they'll say, oh, gosh,
thank goodness I didn't
have to go through that.
So I want everyone that hears it
to kind of take the filter off
of the exact details.
And just think of trauma
as any form of rejection.
And fill that in for yourself.
>>LISA: OK.
>>EWERS: So when I was
10, I was a Navy brat.
And I lived 21 places
by the time I was 14.
So we moved a lot.
And we moved to a school.
And the vice principal
started sexually abusing me.
And so, in those
days-- and I don't
know if it's this way
in the schools anymore.
But you know those
intercom speakers
that would sit up
there in the corner?
>>LISA: Yes.
>>EWERS: That would
crackle to life.
Because we would do "The Pledge
of Allegiance" every morning.
So that would crackle
to life every morning.
We'd do "The Pledge
of Allegiance."
And it would also
crackle to life
throughout the day sometimes,
intermittently, infrequently,
and occasionally when
I couldn't predict
it to ask me to come to
the principal's office.
So every time--
it was Pavlovian.
Every time it would go off, I
would go off into that fight
or flight response.
>>LISA: Right, of course.
>>EWERS: And so, when I
would hear that, "Mr. Smith,
will you please send Keesha
down to the principal's office,"
I would get white knuckled.
I would stare at him,
begging him silently not
to send me down there.
And I was being told
this was because I
was a bad kid by
the vice principal.
So I brought I brought
my second brain.
Can I show you my brain?
>>LISA: OK.
You travel with
another brain, perfect.
>>EWERS: I travel with a brain.
Just in case one doesn't
work, I have another.
So the thing that I want
everyone to understand
is our brain is not the same
from childhood until we die.
So as we age, it goes
through transitions.
And when you're young,
when you're a child,
this front part is not
fully developed yet.
This is called our adult brain.
It's the prefrontal cortex.
It's in charge of executive
function is what we call it.
In other words, this
is why a lot of people
can't lose weight.
Because if they're not
engaged in this part
and they're more in their
fight or flight response,
they're going to go back to
childhood habits of wanting
sugar to soothe themselves.
This is in charge of what
we put on a fork, what
we put in our cup, how we spend
our money, who we relate to
and how.
This is everything.
And so when we're kids,
it's not fully developed
till we're 26 years old.
That's why teenagers have
impulse control, parents,
so that you understand your
kids a little bit better.
And it's why children need
to have that guidance that we
give them.
And so in a situation like
mine and many children
don't have a well-attuned
caregiver right
by their side at all times.
When they get into a situation
that they don't understand,
they will make stuff up.
And so they want to try
and explain their world.
They're trying to
be a little humans
in a world with big humans
and know their place.
And so, for me, what I made
up is the world's not safe.
Because it wasn't.
That was accurate at the time.
And adults can't be trusted.
Because in that time where
I was, they couldn't.
And then from there, you
create an adaptation behavior
to that belief that you
create when you're a kid.
And you carry those
into adulthood.
And mine in this
case was, I have
to be perfect to even survive.
>>LISA: So we're constantly
operating from that childhood
brain.
>>EWERS: Yes.
The beauty is is that, when
you get into adulthood,
and this is fully
formed, and you're not
running so much on that
primal, reptilian brain,
you actually get a chance to
go back and reframe that story
and reclaim your power.
That's the healing
with all of this.
So it's not just set in stone.
This just happens to have
happened at the time when
this wasn't there yet.
>>LISA: OK.
So what is the link between
the trauma and the low libido
and the autoimmunity?
>>EWERS: So inside--
I'm just going to
open this brain
And we have that reptilian
brain that I just alluded to.
Now this part here is called
our limbic system, our amygdala.
We know from MRI scans now
of brains, of imaging--
and when I did my study, I
did a lot of brain mapping.
And what I saw was, when
you go through trauma
as a child-- let's call it
Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder,
PTSD.
A lot of people are familiar
with that terminology--
we actually get shrinkage
in adulthood of this part,
the executive adult function.
And we get growth in the
right side of our amygdala.
So this also is triggered.
And it happens with people
that say that they're
constantly overwhelmed.
You do not have had to
have had sexual trauma,
domestic violence,
psychological, emotional,
spiritual trauma
for this to happen.
We now know from
brain imaging scans
that, if you say to
yourself that you
are overwhelmed every single
day of your life, this shrinks.
This grows.
>>LISA: Can you reverse it?
>>EWERS: You can.
That's the good news.
I never talk about anything
that's not reversible.
>>LISA: Good.
[LAUGHING]
>>EWERS: You absolutely can.
It's called a
perceived stress scale.
And so if you go into your life
and your day with, oh, my gosh,
I get to live my mission and
my purpose, and I'm busy,
and I'm so excited, then
you're not perceiving
that as a stressful thing.
I have four kids.
If I say, oh, I'm
raising four children
and I'm so excited that I
have these beautiful beings
around me rather
than, oh, my gosh,
they're sucking
everything dry from me--
it's all about the way
we perceive things.
It affects the actual
physiology of our brain.
>>LISA: You have four kids.
>>EWERS: I'm empty nested now
as of just a couple of months
ago-- but, yes.
>>LISA: So how do we go from
that place of killing ourselves
to thriving?
>>EWERS: So that's a
really good question.
And you heard me say that
it's so much about perception.
And so sometimes, you
have to borrow a brain.
And in this case, I don't
mean my plastic brain.
I mean a therapist.
I call therapy
borrowing a brain.
It's somebody that
can look at patterns,
and recognize what's going on,
and show you what's happening,
and help you reorganize
your pattern.
>>LISA: Would it help to
get a brain scan like this?
>>EWERS: Not necessary unless
you're showing actual cognitive
issues.
And what I mean
by that is, let's
say that you're suspicious that
you've got MS, because there's
something going on
physiologically,
or Alzheimer's, and dementia,
and those kinds of things.
There are centers
around the country that
do brain imaging for kids
with oppositional behavior,
things that are going
on that nobody can fix,
and it's really impacting
life in a terrible way.
I always recommend
having an MRI for that.
>>LISA: So what would you
see, the front cortex being--
>>EWERS: It depends.
You'll see different
parts of the brain light
up for different things.
>>LISA: And does it matter
if it's a different color,
or are there holes in the brain?
>>EWERS: Yeah, so
that shrinkage,
that atrophy of that prefrontal
cortex shows up as holes.
Now, the interesting thing
is is, around the country,
we're legalizing marijuana.
And there's a really
interesting thing
that happens with
the brain-- that you
can look at images of
people that don't use
marijuana and people that do.
And there are holes in that
same area of the brain.
>>LISA: Of those that do that.
>>EWERS: Of those that do.
And so, just because
it's legal, doesn't
mean it's a good
thing for your brain.
>>LISA: Mm-mm.
So you're talking about
all kinds of trauma.
>>EWERS: Yes.
>>LISA: So it's not
just sexual trauma.
It could be emotional.
>>EWERS: Yes.
>>LISA: What happened if the
trauma is in the adult years?
Does the same thing happen?
>>EWERS: It does.
And what I want to
actually differentiate
is two kinds of trauma.
There's capital T Trauma and
there's lower case t trauma.
And when we talk about
capital T Trauma,
we're talking about
domestic violence.
We're talking about
physical, and we're
talking about
emotional, and we're
talking about psychological,
and spiritual trauma.
When we talk about
lower case t trauma,
it's the one that I was
talking about before,
where we feel overwhelmingly
stressed and burned out,
and there's nothing left.
And this is just like the
flight attendant saying,
you have to put your oxygen mask
on yourself before you put it
on your child.
It's the, I call--
the women of our time trying
to bring home the bacon,
fry it up in the pan, and
look out at the same time.
And we're burning ourselves out.
We're actually not
wired and designed
to be able to maintain such
an intense level of stress.
But there is research that shows
that the right amount of stress
is what we need.
So if you look at
it as a bell curve,
if you hit the center, which is
enough stress to challenge you,
enough to make you
reach beyond what
you think you're capable of--
>>LISA: Exercise does that.
>>EWERS: Exactly.
It's a perfect metaphor.
>>LISA: Positive stress, yes.
>>EWERS: If you
just go like this,
you're not going to get
developed bicep muscle.
If you put a weight in your
hand, now you have resistance.
I always think of life
as a spiritual gymnasium.
And so all of these events--
you see me talking about my
experience of sexual abuse.
And I have a smile on my face.
And that might creep people out.
>>LISA: Amazing.
>>EWERS: But the thing
of it is is I now
look at it as that resistance
training from life that
made me who I am today.
And so at the end
of the day, I never
look at challenges as bad.
They just happen to be the
resistance training of life.
>>LISA: There's a way--
and you are going
to talk about this--
of how to go into the
memory and take the heat off
of it, which is helpful.
We're going to go
through that in a second.
First, I want to talk
about the levels of trauma
that people experience
and how it does impact.
And this could also had
to do with the whole gig
economy, and the side
hustle, and everything
that we have in life is
constantly taxing us.
It's same thing, right?
>>EWERS: It is.
And there's research that shows
that, by the time we leave
the house in the morning,
a lot of our willpower
is already used up, because
we have so many hits to it.
We just have so much
sensory input these days.
And we're called on to be in so
many different places at once
just on our computer.
And so I think that this
is really impacting us
in terms of the
level of stress we
perceive ourselves to be under.
So again, it's about
really re-framing that.
And we can talk about
a way to do that.
But what we now
do know is that--
the Adverse Childhood
Experiences study
was looking at these big,
capital T Trauma instances.
It was conducted by Kaiser
Permanente and the Centers
for Disease Control
between 1995 and 1997--
the biggest study of its
kind, over 3,000 participants.
And the reason it
even came to be
is because Kaiser had
a weight loss clinic.
And it was really productive.
People were successfully losing
the weight they wanted to lose.
But there was a portion that
was dropping out before they
had reached their goal.
And luckily, the director was
very curious and went back
and start interviewing the
people that were dropping out
that were successfully
losing weight
and found out that a lot of
them had been sexually abused.
And so that got him thinking
about this impact of trauma
on adult choices.
And so they coupled with the
Centers for Disease Control
and did this giant study.
What they found is they only
looked at 10 different kinds
of abuse, you could say.
And they are those
that I was just
talking about, sexual,
physiological, psychological,
emotional, spiritual abuse.
But also, watching mom
get abused was one--
having some kind of loss.
So in my case, my
dad was out to sea
all the time when
I was growing up.
So that's actually
considered an ACE score.
Having a divorce
in your childhood,
having a parent incarcerated,
having a parent or a caregiver
addicted to drugs or
alcohol, just neglect
is considered an ACE score.
And the higher that
ACE score, the higher
your risk for all of the
long-term, chronic things
that we see in adulthood.
>>LISA: Autoimmune.
And what about digestion?
How does this impact--
you mentioned that earlier--
the gut.
>>EWERS: Yeah, the zebra
being chased by a lion.
And so if you believe
that you're stressed,
then you actually shut down
all of your digestive system
so that you don't have to
stop and go to the bathroom
while there's something on
your tail trying to eat you.
>>LISA: Right, yeah.
And then does it impact
the biome in the gut?
>>EWERS: Yes, absolutely.
Because that cortisol that's
released as a stress response
kills and changes the interior.
You start loosening up the
cells that line the gut wall.
And now bad bugs can get
into the center of that.
We call that dysbiosis.
And they live in those spaces.
I always call it apartment
complexes for these bad bugs.
>>LISA: That's a leaky gut.
>>EWERS: That's a leaky
gut and dysbiosis.
And the two of those together
will create an environment
that makes it impossible
for you to lose weight
no matter how hard you try.
I can't tell you
how many people come
to see me in my medical practice
that say that they work out six
days a week, seven days a week.
They're doing everything right.
>>LISA: That's that
stubborn weight.
>>EWERS: They're eating right.
But they have got
this leaky gut issue
that's happened as a result
of either taking antibiotics
for years, or
steroids for years,
or using non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs
for years.
But stress is the number one.
>>LISA: Amazing.
What about blood
sugar regulation?
>>EWERS: So yeah,
there's some pillars
that you can think of
in terms of health.
And I always like to take this.
Ayurvedic medicine is the
sister science of yoga.
It's a 10,000-year-old framework
of science from a long time
ago.
And what happened is the people
that were observing humans
in India and their relationship
to the climate, to the stars,
to each other, to food,
to the aging process,
they developed this beautiful
medical arm of yoga,
you could call it, called
Ayurvedic medicine.
And translated into English,
it means the science of life.
It's kind of like
a owner's manual
that you wish you'd
had when you were born,
the care and feeding of
each individual human.
Because we're not all the same.
And one of the
things that they say
is that we're more than
just our physical self.
We're actually
the physical body.
Then we have an energetic body.
We have an emotional
body, a wisdom body
and then this fifth layer that
they call the anandamaya kosha
that is your portal to bliss.
It's what Carl Jung used to
call the collective unconscious.
And that's your access to that.
That's where you get those
epiphanies in the shower,
and you get the solutions
to your problems.
It's when you're in that place.
>>LISA: Yes, yes.
>>EWERS: But if you're toxic
in any of those other layers,
you don't get good
access to that spot.
>>LISA: You have to get the
other layers right before you--
>>EWERS: You have to
get them all right.
And so, when we talk about
the pillars of health,
or nutrition, or nourishment,
then I always take that,
and I integrate it
with these five layers.
And so, if we start
talking about digestion,
I'm not just talking about
the digestion of your food.
I'm talking about the digestion
of your emotions, also,
of your experiences.
They have to be
properly digested.
And Ayurvedic medicine
says, autoimmune disease
is undigested anger.
So when I was diagnosed
with rheumatoid arthritis
when I was 30--
23 years ago--
I was able to reverse
it within six months
by learning to digest the anger
I never felt from my trauma
in my past.
Because I had put it in a
nice little box in my closet.
>>LISA: So it's not
wheat allergies or--
>>EWERS: It's all of it.
So when you talk about the
body, you talk about, OK,
so what is it that
your body wants to eat?
And the more broken
down your gut
wall is, the more
food sensitivities
you're going to have.
And I found at that
time that I, indeed--
and I have a genetic issue
with wheat, also-- with gluten.
I cannot do gluten.
>>LISA: Me, too, yeah.
>>EWERS: I cannot do dairy.
I can't do sugar.
And I don't.
And so that was part
of the healing for me.
But it didn't get me
all the way there.
And this is the kind of patient
that I see in my practice.
>>LISA: I see.
>>EWERS: Doing "everything
right," all the food
stuff, all the functional
medicine protocol, supplements,
testing.
But they haven't learned
that they haven't digested
their emotions, and their
experiences, and their thoughts
properly.
>>LISA: How do you
digest emotions?
>>EWERS: How do you
digest your emotions?
Isn't that fascinating to think
of digesting your emotions?
So the way that you
do that is you really
stay present with it.
You say, instead of--
OK, so a lot of people that
might be watching this show
are very spiritually
aware people.
It's "The Aware Show," right?
>>LISA: Yes.
>>EWERS: So it's all
about inspiration.
Well, we can do this process
called spiritual bypass,
where we say, I'm not going
to feel any negative emotion.
>>LISA: Right.
I'm just going to go up here.
>>EWERS: I don't allow
myself to be angry.
I'm going to just dial up the
vibrational level to here.
But there's a little kid
part of yourself in there
that had a right to feel angry
about something that happened.
And you've actually
denied that emotion,
which is a human emotion.
So we have to move beyond the
judgment of the emotion to--
sadness is OK to feel as
long as it doesn't get stuck.
>>LISA: And so is anger.
>>EWERS: And so is anger, and so
is jealousy, and so is hatred.
>>LISA: As long as
it's not directed at--
>>EWERS: Right.
You get to feel those things
as long as you're actually--
if you get stuck in them,
it's like being constipated.
So it's the emotional flip side
of the physiological response.
Constipation is holding
on to your crap.
And so you can get
emotionally constipated.
And you can get
spiritually constipated.
And so realizing
that and allowing
yourself to move through your
emotions is really important.
But first, you have to
acknowledge that you
have a right to feel it.
I always call
emotions the symphony.
It's not going to be
realistic to think
you're only going to
hear twinkly flutes when
you go to the symphony.
Sometimes, you're going to
hear the kettle drums, and then
tympani, and all of those--
>>LISA: Dimensions.
>>EWERS: --dimension.
It's just
understanding that, oh,
there's something for me
to learn from this space.
And then I can develop into
a higher developmental state.
First, you have to be
able to feel the feelings.
Because they're in your
body no matter what.
Whether you like it
or not, they're there.
>>LISA: And you usually
don't realize it.
>>EWERS: And you
So sometimes, we walk around
as little heads, like my brain.
>>LISA: Yeah, pretty much so.
>>EWERS: Exactly.
You're walking around like
a head without a body.
I always say, people
with autoimmune disease
are in a combative
relationship with themselves.
Because their immune
system is attacking them.
>>LISA: So do we go after quick
fixes, like things to cope,
caffeine, or drugs, or whatnot?
>>EWERS: That is what
we do as a general rule,
like the standard American diet.
That is what the
American way is.
>>LISA: Comfort food, yes.
>>EWERS: Yet, it's not a
functional way of doing this.
And it doesn't get you anywhere.
It actually just creates
this temporary fix
of a symptom that
has a long-term side
effect down the road.
And so, if you really
want to break the pattern,
then you have to be able
to feel the emotion.
And I have a whole process
that I do where you say, OK,
so let's say that you were in
a conversation of conflict--
which is totally normal.
Conflict is normal
inside of a marriage.
So you're with your spouse.
And you have this
conflict-laden subject matter
that you have returned back
to again in your marriage.
So in order to not keep
repeating the same pattern
and going in these
circular conversations that
affect your libido, and your
health, and your relationship
itself, if you can stop
for a second and say, OK,
how do I feel right now when
I am having this conversation
that's full of conflict?
Do you feel scared?
Do you feel anxious?
Do you feel sad?
Do you feel angry?
Anger is always a hard crust
over the top with something
softer.
>>LISA: Underneath it, yeah.
>>EWERS: So if you can dive
down underneath the angry crust
and say, what do I really feel?
I feel panic.
I feel anxious.
I feel like I have no power.
I don't have any control.
Well, if I don't have control,
then what do I feel about that?
It's always going to be fear.
>>LISA: Ultimately,
under anger is fear.
>>EWERS: Well, no,
lack of control.
>>LISA: Ah.
>>EWERS: We try and
control everything.
Because it's based on--
>>LISA: Safe.
>>EWERS: --feeling fear.
So if you can access
that and you say, OK,
so where in my body
do I feel this fear,
you will have a place that
got set up in childhood.
Every child feels fear.
Every adult feels fear.
So you go to that place.
And a lot of people
feel it in their gut.
Some feel it in their
shoulders, some in their jaw,
some in their chest.
>>LISA: Or all of them.
>>EWERS: Or all of
it together, exactly.
And you say, OK.
And you just check
in with your body.
OK.
And then, if you can say,
when's the first time I
remember feeling that feeling?
And just be open to
whatever it comes up.
Oh, when I was five and
my baby sister was born--
that's actually a
big, common one--
lack of control.
A new family member drops into
the center of your happy, rosy
little home.
That's a big one
for a lot of people.
And you feel rejected often.
And so I do a lot of
therapy on a lot of people.
And that's a huge one.
So you can go back to, oh-- or
I had a special needs sibling,
where they were getting
a lot of attention.
And it's not OK to feel
jealous and resentful of that.
You haven't given yourself
permission to feel that.
>>LISA: There is no
permission in the household.
>>EWERS: It is locked
in here, exactly.
So accessing that
and saying, oh--
then you go back, and you get
that little kid part of you,
and you give them permission
to have their feelings.
>>LISA: In that moment, right?
>>EWERS: And you sit
with them in that moment.
And you say, it's OK.
I've got this now.
I'm with you.
And you can actually
say anything
you want, and I
will hear you, 24/7.
Who is the likely
person to understand
exactly what are the words
that you need to say-- is you.
And we always look for that
from outside of ourselves.
We want our spouse
to do it for us.
>>LISA: Or a therapist.
I mean, to sit
there in that pain
that you would be in,
to say, this was wrong,
and who does that?
It's injust in the world.
>>EWERS: Right.
So you have to be able
to have that time.
And then you have to
move beyond that, too.
That's what actually
#MeToo right now is.
It's a toddler
developmental state
of our culture, where
we're moving from silence,
which is pre-verbal infancy, to
toddlers saying, he touched me.
He hurt me.
It's perfect.
We need to have our voice.
We need to be able to say
that if that happened to us.
But we can't get stuck there
with blaming and shaming.
We have to then move into
our developmental levels
and say, OK, so now, what
am I to learn from that?
How do I find my voice?
How do I advocate for myself?
And then, how do I
move into forgiveness?
And people often will confuse
forgiveness and reconciliation.
When I got to the
forgiveness process
for my sexual perpetrator, I
didn't call him up and say,
let's go have tea.
I said, I did all
of this on my own.
And then I knew that
this isn't someone
I want to reconcile with.
Forgiveness and reconciliation
are two different things.
You have to forgive.
Because otherwise, the
bitterness stays in your body.
And you will get sick from it.
You do not have to reconcile.
>>LISA: You don't have
to go to the perpetrator.
>>EWERS: Do not
have to reconcile.
In a spousal or a
child/parent relationship,
it's what's called a
relationship of value.
There's more of a
pull and a desire
to get into a
reconciliation space
if the person has
acknowledged right
they've hurt you, done
the steps to rectify that,
and apologized--
if they're not still a
dangerous person in your life.
If they are, you
do not reconcile.
That's called good boundaries.
>>LISA: With this person, would
you never reconcile with them,
because they were clueless.
>>EWERS: No.
Yeah.
Yeah, because that was a
misuse of power from somebody
that was an adult in
charge of children.
And he's probably long dead
by the time I did this work.
>>LISA: An unconscious--
>>EWERS: Yeah.
But see, that's
the beauty-- is you
can do this work without
having them there
and without having them alive.
There are a lot of
parents that haven't
been really great parents for
children that are now adults.
And this work, you don't
have to have a living parent
to do it with.
And also, if your
parent is still
not one that
demonstrates safety,
you don't have to reconcile.
>>LISA: That's really important.
>>EWERS: It is, yeah.
And I always say that is the
emotional, mental, spiritual
flip side of the boundaries
that your immune system
and your digestive system
are supposed to be setting.
Instead of being hypervigilantly
looking for everything out
there and firing against
it-- which is what autoimmune
disease is--
as you set boundaries
in your physical life--
healthy ones-- you
learn to say no.
You learn to say
yes to yourself.
You learn self-care.
This calms down.
Your immune system calms down.
That's how I reversed my RA.
>>LISA: Is there an
issue or a relationship
between unresolved sexual trauma
and overachieving, success,
lack of boundaries.
>>EWERS: That's such
a great question.
And there is.
And it's not just sexual trauma.
It's actually any kind
of rejection experience
in childhood.
The more we have those--
I've done therapy.
There was a young man
who came to me one time.
And his big trauma was
tripping in the cafeteria
in front of a girl he liked--
in fact, a whole table of girls.
Remember those days
at the cafeteria?
>>LISA: Right.
It's in movies like that.
>>EWERS: Yes, exactly.
And he tripped and spilled his
food in front of everybody.
And I tell this story all the
time, because it's so poignant.
It's so sad.
Because we've all--
we can relate to that
and having the entire cafeteria
laugh at you-- public shaming.
>>LISA: Totally.
>>EWERS: He spent the next two
years in the library eating.
And his belief he
created about himself
was that he was stupid,
and clumsy, and didn't
deserve to be around people.
And his adaptation
behavior that he created
was to be shy, and
introverted, and hide.
It was getting in his way
as a corporate executive
when he had to
give presentations
in front of people.
He came to see me,
because he had a condition
of sweating profusely.
And his dress shirts were
always covered in sweat stains.
And so he came to
me wanting me to fix
that physiological problem.
And we delved into--
and this story came out.
So it's perfectionism.
Perfectionism is present
and every single person
with autoimmune disease.
And many of the people
listening to us right now
don't even know they have
or they're cooking up
an autoimmune disease.
It can take anywhere
from 10 to 30 years
to actually develop one.
For me, I had my sexual
trauma when I was 10.
When I was 30, It was like a
little turkey timer inside me--
ping.
You have RA,
Rheumatoid Arthritis,
an incurable autoimmune disease
according to Western standards.
My doctor gave me
prescriptions and said,
come back when you
get worse-- not if.
And when I asked if there was
anything I could do with diet--
I was already a marathon runner,
made everything from scratch.
I was a healthy
person in my mind.
She said, no, this
is because you just
drew the short end of
the genetic lottery.
My grandfather had had RA.
So indeed, that gene
had been flipped on.
>>LISA: Activated.
>>EWERS: And so this is a
really important point--
is that perfectionism
leads to illness.
And most people that are
perfectionists don't know it.
They don't realize it.
It's just their standard,
norm way of being.
>>LISA: Well, there
is no perfectionism.
That's the problem.
It can never be
perfect enough to--
>>EWERS: And
perfectionists will say
that, because the bar is set
so high in their own mind
that they say, are you kidding?
Do you know how far
I am from that bar?
There's no way I'm
a perfectionist.
And it's only those
people that say that.
They're actually perfectionists.
>>LISA: Yeah, that
happens to me.
Like, an imperfect voice
is driving me nuts.
>>EWERS: Oh, it's sexy.
>>LISA: Oh, OK.
We'll go with that.
>>EWERS: Reframe.
>>LISA: From the sexologist.
>>EWERS: That's right.
>>LISA: I'll go with that.
>>LISA: So how do we
repair this level of shame?
>>EWERS: So like I said before,
people usually come and see me
for something other than this.
People don't automatically say,
I want to go fix my trauma.
Instead, they have
something that's happening.
They're having
relationship issues.
They're overweight.
They are having some
kind of skin thing
that's showing up in the mirror.
They're fatigued.
They can't think of
anything properly anymore.
So they come to see me for that.
And then they find
out that, oh, it's
what I call the freedom
framework-- that there
are these four corner pieces
of solving their puzzle.
Anytime we solve a puzzle,
we have four corner pieces.
And they're the
same for everyone--
genetics, your digestive health,
your level of toxic exposure
including your thoughts,
and how willing and able
you are to detox those.
And then the last one is past
trauma and current-day stress.
So you asked earlier
if adult trauma
can cause this-- absolutely.
This can up-regulate your
genetic expression, too.
So for 23 years,
I haven't had RA.
I still have that gene.
My grandfather had.
>>LISA: You deactivated it.
You literally did.
>>EWERS: I changed
the way it manifests.
>>LISA: That's amazing.
>>EWERS: So I do genetic testing
on every one of my patients
for this reason--
not because I'm looking for
a gene linked to a disease.
I'm looking to see which
ones are there that we can
deactivate, to use your words.
>>LISA: Before they activate.
>>EWERS: Or turn them off if
they're already in front of me
with a problem.
>>LISA: Let's take a look here
at Dr. Keesha Ewers talking
at the Harvard Business School
about the Unbroken Program.
Take a look here.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- This is why I created
the You Unbroken Program,
to help people who had
adverse childhood experiences
deal with them in adulthood.
It's why I wrote
about it in my book,
"Solving the Autoimmune Puzzle."
It's why I teach all my health
coaches about how to heal this.
It's why every patient
that comes into my practice
starts with the ABCs
of trauma healing,
even though they don't
that's happening.
A, the ACES quiz--
those questions get asked
but in a roundabout way,
so they don't know.
B, beliefs-- our brains
are not fully developed
until we're 26 years old.
That means, when we have
an adverse childhood
experience as a kid,
our brains are immature.
We make stuff up.
Trip in front of the cute boy
or cute girl in the lunchroom,
don't get picked for
the baseball team,
flunk your first test--
these are all adverse
childhood experiences.
And they impact your
health and the quality
of your relationships depending
on what you started believing
about them at that time.
C, connect the dots between
those beliefs, the behaviors
that emerged from
them, and what's
on the end of your fork,
how you're processing
your information and your
stressors, how you're sleeping,
how you're moving-- all of it.
I am not a victim
of sexual abuse.
I am not a victim of
a body who betrayed me
by autoimmune disease
and tried to kill me.
Those are two of the best
things that ever happened to me.
I call them the weight,
the resistance training
in your spiritual gymnasium.
They made me stronger, more
resilient, more compassionate,
a better mother, wife, healer,
coach, guide, and entrepreneur.
You are not a victim,
unless you choose it.
You have to reframe your
story to reclaim your health,
because you're the
superhero of your own life!
[CHEERING]
[END PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: That is so important.
Because it shows how we all
can eventually be OK from this.
And that is so important.
So you created something
called the Freedom Framework.
We've been talking
about the fact--
we're going to get to
the solutions on this.
And this is important.
>>EWERS: Yes.
Well, I want to
first preface this
with-- sitting in that
audience in Harvard
listening to some
of my colleagues
present their science.
I presented my study, and
my science, and my work.
In listening to other
people, every one of them
had a story of
distress in childhood.
And I remember turning to
my colleague and saying,
my kids haven't had
enough to fight against.
We really try so hard
to protect our children.
I really tried hard to make
their childhood very magical.
And at the end of the day,
is that really a great thing
to do?
Are we keeping the
resistance training?
I mean, I don't want my
kids to be sexually abused.
I don't want them
to be kidnapped.
But at the end of the
day, have they had enough
to struggle against?
Because every single person
in there that had made
a giant contribution
to the world
had some kind of struggle.
>>LISA: Trauma.
>>EWERS: Yeah.
So when I do this freedom
framework, and I present it,
and I tell you about it,
I'm solving your puzzle
when I'm doing this with you.
But I'm also trying
to help you move out
of the judgment space of
that's good, that's bad.
>>LISA: Or I'm good, I'm bad.
>>EWERS: Exactly.
There's no good and bad food.
There's food that your body
will react to in a different way
than it will for another one.
There's also non-food
that we call food.
Anything you open
up out of a package
that you've got at the
Mini Mart is not food.
>>LISA: Yeah, no, not anymore.
>>EWERS: Exactly.
And so we have to
think in those terms
when I go through the
Freedom Framework.
So the Freedom
Framework is the way
that I design really
approaching everybody
that comes to see me that
has a puzzle that we're
trying to solve.
And like I said, every
time we take a box
and we put the puzzle
pieces on the table,
we always look for the
four corner pieces first.
And then we start looking
for the edge pieces.
So the edges are what I call
the four pillars of the Freedom
Framework.
The first one is to
uncover the root causes.
And so we always have to look
at the root cause of anything.
And that will be
found in the body.
It'll be found in the mind,
and the heart, and the spirit,
and in the story I really listen
to how people tell their story.
If it's laden with
victimization,
I know we have to start
there, because it's
a disempowered way of being.
And I know that that hasn't
been digested properly yet.
And then the second--
well, to stick to
that first pillar
first, if we're
looking at the body,
that's functional medicine
laboratory testing.
It's genetics.
It's looking at your microbiome.
It's looking at
food sensitivities.
It's looking at your
hormones and your adrenals.
Who's living in your gut?
All of that is
part of that part.
>>LISA: The data.
>>EWERS: Really important.
So we're looking for those.
So that second
edge piece is going
to be to confront that data.
And that's going
to be your weight
that you get off of your scale.
It's going to be
your libido level.
I look at libido as
whole life vitality,
not necessarily sexual.
I'm looking at, are you
excited about the things
you've been excited about?
Or have you gone dull?
Is your light off?
>>LISA: Where is the joy?
>>EWERS: Exactly.
Or have you always
wanted to write a book,
but you're not getting anywhere?
You're just binge
watching Netflix.
So we're looking at that data.
We're looking at
the laboratory data
that we just talked about, your
quality of sleep, your mood.
That's all data.
It's feedback from your body.
Then the third is going
to be to really connect
the dots between that data
and your lifestyle choices.
So in other words, people
like to disconnect the fact
that they're
rewarding themselves
with the pastry and the fact
that they have joint pain.
They don't really
want to acknowledge
that those two go together.
>>LISA: Overeating
and weight gain.
>>EWERS: Exactly.
>>LISA: There's a disconnect.
>>EWERS: Right.
And sometimes, like I said,
they're not overeating,
but there's some
bugs in the gut that
are creating the issue
with not losing weight.
Or there's a food sensitivity.
Maybe you're eating
a lot of coconut oil
and you're not genetically
able to manage that fat.
Or you have a food
sensitivity to it,
but you read somewhere that
good fats are good for you.
It's not true for
every single person.
So you have to actually connect
the dots between your data
and your lifestyle choices.
>>LISA: This is so detailed.
I love this, yes.
>>EWERS: Because there is
never a one-size-fits-all.
You cannot say that good fats
will make you lose weight,
because it is inaccurate for
25% of the population that carry
a certain gene that actually
don't metabolize fats very
well.
It's really interesting.
I know.
And then if you look at it
from an Ayurvedic standpoint,
the kapha body type--
which I'm a pitta kapha.
I can't have that
much fat, either.
Sugar, fat, and processed
foods, and grains
actually make me gain weight.
So there's ever going to be
the same formula for everyone.
That's why this Freedom
Framework is so important.
And then the last edge
piece, the bottom of it,
is to create the life that you
want with intention instead
of what I call the
factory default
settings from childhood.
So instead of being
run by this idea
that I have to be
perfect to survive,
I have to reframe,
and reclaim my power,
and recreate the life that
I actually want to live,
not one that's driven from
the unconscious belief system.
>>LISA: It's amazing
to think that success
comes from that trauma.
Isn't that interesting?
>>EWERS: Yes.
Success only comes
from that trauma
if you have digested it well.
Because otherwise,
you'll run yourself
into the ground trying
to be successful.
>>LISA: What is
healthy success then?
>>EWERS: Success where you
can enjoy your life still,
that you don't feel
overwhelmed, and overstressed.
And your children
look at you and don't
say, who are you again?
I don't recognize you.
>>LISA: Right.
What are you doing?
>>EWERS: Exactly-- that
you've learned to balance.
And that's what
the whole Freedom
Framework is-- is learning
how to find that balance.
But you have to go
through those other three
before you can get to the create
the life you actually want.
Because the brain chemicals,
the messenger chemicals
from your brain called
neurotransmitters--
you have to measure
all these things,
see what you are doing to
make them go off the rails,
fix those before you
can get to that place
of nonjudgmental radical
acceptance, joy for the life
that you really want to lead.
We try to bypass all of that.
>>LISA: And you also
relayed a lot of this
to archetypes, right?
>>EWERS: Yes.
So I've talked a little bit
about the victim archetype.
Archetypes are a
really amazing way
of understanding why you do
what you do in the world.
I use another framework
called the Enneagram.
And that's just a
way that your ego
created a strategy
to get its needs
met when you were a child.
They are the operating code on
your computer from childhood.
And you get to go
back, and you get
to upgrade that
once you discover
that it's there when you
have a fully-formed brain
in adulthood.
>>LISA: So you go
into the feeling,
in all of the feelings.
And you sit with them.
And you then become aware of
what it is you're running,
whatever archetype that is.
What is the next step?
>>EWERS: It depends.
This, again, is not
going to be a cookbook
for every single person--
which is so frustrating.
I remember being in
my Ayurvedic training.
And I'd raise my
hand, ask my teacher,
so what if this, and
this, and this happened?
And every single time,
he would say, it depends.
And it is so true.
Because it depends on the body
type, and the past experiences,
and the current-day
health, and what's
going on for each person.
So I use these structures
to help people understand
where they are right now.
I do like to use Joseph
Campbell's hero's journey.
I call it the sheroe's journey--
TED Talk January,
2019 about this--
about using your trauma, your
disease, your challenge in life
that you might have thought
was very, very negative
and perhaps unfair to uplevel
your developmental state.
And the more that you do
that-- there are developmental
states that we
accelerate through.
And they're always hard.
It's hard to go from
one to the next.
And you can use the hero's
journey to understand it.
You have a call to action.
Rheumatoid arthritis
was one for me.
Then you get to either heed
the call or reject the call.
If I ignore it, it will
keep moving through my body.
I'll get worse, and worse, and
worse with twisted fingers.
I was already starting
to get them twisted,
unless I accept the call,
heed it as something
that I need to go learn
some new information,
find a mentor for that.
So I found a mentor.
Then you get this
new information
that is coming from
the unknown world.
I didn't know anything
about herbs, Ayurveda, yoga.
I knew nothing about therapy.
I'd never been to therapy.
I didn't know any of the
stuff I talk about today.
That was the unknown world.
You get that information.
And then you have to go
into your innermost cave
and integrate it.
How does this fit into my life
where I am on my path today?
Then you come out.
And this is what really
makes people mad.
Life will start to
offer you experiences
where you get to practice.
>>LISA: Found you.
Yes.
[LAUGHING]
>>EWERS: And then when
you get to mastery
of that-- which means you
have to practice it over,
and over, and over again.
And sometimes, you'll fail.
And sometimes,
you'll be successful.
Then you actually emerge into
your next state of development.
And you come back,
you could say,
resurrected as an
oracle or a teacher.
And you get to share that
now with your community.
But the thing that really
makes people mad-- and this
is what I see in my medical
practice all the time.
And I teach a lot of students.
They get so mad when
they have overcome,
and they've come out
on the other end,
and they've learned
this new stuff,
and they've gotten to this
new developmental level.
But then they get
another call to action.
But that's the cycles of life.
That's the way it works.
We move from one
cycle to the next.
>>LISA: Do we ever stop
those call to actions?
>>EWERS: Then you die.
>>LISA: Oh.
So it's part of life.
>>EWERS: This is part of life.
And if we understand--
and I always say,
one of the biggest things
I've learned in this lifetime
is that all unhappiness comes
from unmet expectations.
And if you expect
that that's going
to happen, then when it happens,
you're not so mad about it.
>>LISA: Good point.
>>EWERS: Yeah.
So I went from RA
to breast cancer.
But I'd already learned this.
And it was like--
>>LISA: Oh, my god.
>>EWERS: --OK, now I
know what I need to do.
And I was able to
cure it naturally.
Within a month, it was gone.
And that was a
whole other story.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>EWERS: But I wasn't
angry about it.
I wasn't all the things
I had been with RA.
And so if we can learn
that this is part of life,
it's part of the
cycles of life--
spring follows winter.
Summer follows spring.
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>EWERS: And nature shows
us this all the time.
>>LISA: And you
don't really need
to judge yourself for the drama
and, like you said, the crises.
>>EWERS: I've had
functional medicine
doctors come to
me in my practice,
and they've had cancer.
And they keep it a secret.
They won't talk about it,
because they're ashamed.
Because if they were
walking their talk,
they wouldn't get sick.
That is so untrue.
>>LISA: That's being
hard on ourselves.
>>EWERS: Well,
plus, it's untrue.
You can do and
control what you can.
But life is actually in control.
[LAUGHING]
>>LISA: It's going to take over.
>>EWERS: And so, if you
expect and you understand
that, then when you get
your next challenge,
it's not going to be
something you expect.
And it's going to be something
that's going to challenge you.
Then you can say, oh,
here's the next one.
>>LISA: Do you have
a way for people
to get in touch with this
system, and the ACE testing,
and so forth?
How do people take
it to the next level
if they're really
lit up right now?
>>EWERS: "Solving the
Autoimmune Puzzle"
is a great way to start.
That's my book that I wrote all
this in, the Freedom Framework.
And "Solving the Autoimmune
Puzzle" has worksheets in it.
You can digest it
at your own pace.
And then I also have a
program called You Unbroken
on my website, on drkeesha.com.
And it's trauma that
you never thought maybe
you needed to heal--
it's how to do that.
And I have hard stops
in it, where I say,
OK, if you can't
get past this point,
you need to go borrow a brain.
Here's the kind of
therapist you need to find.
And then I want you to
shop for your therapist
the way you would
shop for shoes.
>>LISA: Try them on.
>>EWERS: You can't
go into a shoe store
and say, I want a pair of tall,
over-the-knee brown boots.
And then you find that
you find one pair,
and it pinches your toe.
You don't walk out of the
shoe store without shoes
on and say, well, shoes
don't work for me--
which is what people
do around therapy.
And so you have to say,
OK, I have to keep looking.
I really want these boots.
So I'm going to
go somewhere else.
I'm going to keep
trying them on.
And you also have to know
that talk therapy just
does not work.
It does not work.
You can do that
with a girlfriend.
>>LISA: What is the best kind?
What does work?
>>EWERS: Trauma
release therapy comes
in several different packages.
And each therapist that
knows that format of therapy
is not maybe going
to be a fit for you.
So you have to shop for it.
EMDR is a really good one,
Eye Movement Desensitization
Reprogramming.
And I show all of the resources
for finding these people
inside this program.
Clinical hypnotherapy,
depending on the style,
can be really helpful.
And then brain
spotting is another one
that a lot of people
haven't heard of.
That's a good one, too.
>>LISA: What is that?
>>EWERS: Brain
spotting was developed
by a doctor named David
Grand who used to teach EMDR
and then discovered
that he could
do this in a different
way a little bit faster.
It kind of speeds
it up a little bit.
>>LISA: Huh, brain spotting.
>>EWERS: And people are
really worried about
go to therapy,
because they think
they're going to have to
relive the darkest experiences
of their lives.
And that's not accurate.
>>LISA: It's releasing it.
>>EWERS: It's
rewiring your brain,
getting a nice bridge between
your adult brain and your child
brain, reframing.
It's a whole trauma
release piece.
And that doesn't happen
with talk therapy.
So yeah, the You
Unbroken program
is really great for that.
>>LISA: I love it.
>>EWERS: And then we've got all
kinds of things on our website
for how to access me.
And I work with
people one-to-one,
and in group settings,
and retreat settings
doing trauma healing.
>>LISA: So one last question
I just want to ask you.
What is a healthy
sexual relationship?
I know you get asked this a lot.
>>EWERS: Yeah.
It's such a good
question, because--
you're going to hear me
say the same thing again--
it depends.
A healthy sexual
relationship is going
to be one where there's
healthy communication.
So I always say that
really fantastic,
scrape-you-off-the-walls sex
comes from really fantastic
scrape-you-off-the-walls
communication.
Women tend to really want their
partner to read their minds.
They really say--
I hear this all the time--
well, if he or she
loved me, then they'd
be able to know
what makes me tick.
And that is really
radically unfair.
That is not accurate.
And we have these
background experiences that
make us who we are as adults.
And we're not always
able to read minds.
In fact, that's pretty unusual.
And it should not be an
expectation from your partner.
And so I always tell women,
if you really want fantastic,
scrape-you-off-the-wall
sex with a partner,
then that means you have to
be able to know your own body
first and communicate how to
get around that body for someone
else.
And so that means being able
to ask for what you want.
>>LISA: Yes, and receive.
>>EWERS: And that's, oftentimes,
a big barrier for women--
is receiving, and saying,
and articulating specifically
what they want.
>>LISA: Yes, rather
than just pleasing.
>>EWERS: Right, exactly.
>>LISA: Is there
another way to--
you say, what's in your
head is in your bed.
Is there a way to do it with
couples therapy, as well?
Do you suggest that?
Or you just really think
working on yourself is the best?
>>EWERS: No, what's in your
head does go to your bud.
And I will work with
a single person--
I don't mean
non-partner, but I mean
an individual in my
practice for a little while.
And then I'll start seeing,
it's always a systems problem.
If a child is having a
problem and needs therapy,
it's a systems problem.
It's a dynamic--
>>LISA: Big picture.
>>EWERS: --inside the couple.
If one of them is having an
issue, it's a systems problem.
And so then I always,
at some point,
pull the couple together.
And we start working on that.
And then usually,
this other individual
has to do some work, too.
In order to uplevel,
you've got to tear apart
the scaffolding and
the foundation that
didn't work, and rebuild it.
>>LISA: And cover it.
>>EWERS: Yeah.
>>LISA: I always
asked my guests,
what is the biggest
reason you do what you do?
What's your biggest why?
>>EWERS: Oh, my why is really
helping people attain freedom
from these old, really
needing-to-be-deleted belief
systems that are running them
from a place where their brains
weren't fully developed, and
they made up these stories.
And then they start
attracting people to them
that have the script
in their hands
to live that same story out.
So my why is to have
everyone attain freedom.
>>LISA: That is my desire, too--
that we would live
without trauma.
What a life of
freedom that would be.
Thank you so much.
And thank you so
much for watching.
If you'd like to watch more
inspirational programming
go to gaia.com.
I am Lisa Garr.
And until next time, I
invite you to stay aware.
[MUSIC PLAYING]